---
tags:
- writings/summaries/meditations
- web
title: "23. The Veil of Thought"
who_author: Сэм Харрис
---

When you sit down to meditate, he will find yourself assailed by thoughts, thoughts about what you need to do later in the day. Thoughts about things that worry you thoughts about things you want, or don't want, the moment you attempt to pay attention to your breath, or to the sound of the wind and the trees, you will meet your mind. And your mind is the most rambling, chaotic, insulting, insufferable person you will ever meet is like having some maniac walk through the front door of your house and follow you from room to room and refuse to stop talking. And this happens every day of your life. 

It is possible to get him to stop talking for brief periods of time. And that can come with greater concentration in meditation. It's possible to pay attention to the breath, for instance, and to be so focused on it, that thoughts no longer arise. And this can be an extremely pleasant experience when it happens, but it's a temporary experience. Real relief comes when we recognize thoughts for what they are. mere appearances in consciousness, images, bits of language. 

The fact that a thought has arisen does not give it a necessary claim upon your life. It need not have any implications, psychological or otherwise. Of course, you'll continue to think and to be moved to act by thoughts. 

But meditation gives you a choice. Do you really want to follow this next thought wherever it leads?