---
tags:
- writings/summaries/meditations/m
- web
title: "32. Meditation 16"
who_author: Сэм Харрис
---

Deepen your understanding by revisiting the key concepts of meditation practice.

Again, just find a posture that’s comfortable and you might gently close your eyes and take a few deep breaths.  

For the beginning of this session, focus as precisely on the breath as you can.  
And you might add a mental note in your mind, either the word in and out, or you can count each breath.
Keeping the voice in your mind very soft, it’s just a way of recommitting your attention to the breath at each moment, beginning and end.
And rather than try to get closer to the breath with your attention, just notice that it appears all on its own in the space of consciousness. 

There really is no getting closer, and there’s no place from which you would get closer. 

Everything is just appearing as it is, sensations, sounds, thoughts, and the moment you notice you’ve been lost in thought and have entirely forgotten the purpose of sitting here just notice the thought itself unraveling and disappearing without judgment, and begin again. 

As you feel the breath come and go, become aware of all the other sensations that are appearing in and as your body.  
There’s really a cloud of sensation, tingling, pressure, temperature.  

For the last minute of this session, see if you can make your mind as big as possible.  
Don’t focus on anything.  
Don’t restrict your attention to anything.  
Just let your mind be wide open like the sky.  
Well, once again, thank you for the efforts you’re making here.  
I wish you the best of luck integrating this kind of attention into the rest of your day.  